---
title: Recently
date: 2024-06-19
---

Recently I've been deep down a crossword puzzle rabbit hole. I started
a new side project that has taken most of my writing energy: [them's
crossing words](https://txwords.com), a blog where I post daily
crossword puzzle reviews and articles about the craft of puzzle
construction. Thus far there's about fifty crossword puzzles featured
and discussed, a sizable number of grids with over 10k words dedicated
to crossing them.

When I started the project I thought I might burn out quickly on the
idea. Writing a daily review was actually far from my original
intent. The thing is, there's just so much to talk about when it comes
to the art of crossword construction (and puzzles in general, by
extension). Every crossword is nuanced and interesting, built by
constructors that bring their own voice into the grid with interesting
clues and clever themes.

The idea of a puzzle blog has been bouncing around in my head for a
long time now, and my motivation to start one was largely influenced
by the release of [Braid, Anniversary
Edition](https://store.steampowered.com/app/499180/Braid_Anniversary_Edition/). When
I was a kid playing through Braid on the Xbox Live Arcade, I didn't
actually care that much for puzzle games. They were too slow and
plodding for my High School brain.

Since then I've come to really appreciate the genre, with games like
The Witness and Outer Wilds completely blowing my mind as to what's
possible in the medium of video games. When Braid re-released this
year with loads of developer commentary, I was in.

Now that I'm playing through it as an adult I have a newfound
appreciation for its narrative and design. There are loads of spots
where the narrative of the tale is paralleled by the mechanics of the
gameplay and the design of the puzzles, a genius combination of
factors seen in few games. What really drew me in, however, was the
developer commentary, discussing the minutiae of game, sound,
narrative, and art design behind every level and artistic motif.

The body of commentary in Braid, Anniversary Edition is
staggering. The amount of thought that bleeds into every ounce of that
game is an incredible achievement showing just how artistic the medium
of video games can be. It inspired me to start writing about puzzles
because I think they're more than just a method of wasting
time. They're little worlds of simulation where ideas mesh with
action, a creative landscape of human ingenuity clashing with
constraints.

Needless to say I've been noodling on puzzles for the last few months,
looking back on some of my old [Puzzlescript
prototypes](https://txwords.com/games/) and some of the things I
learned about game design when I hacked them together. Building a
level for a puzzle game is kind of like mentoring new engineers. You
never really know how well you understand an idea until you need to
teach it to someone. Same goes for a mechanic in a puzzle game: what
is the truth that you're trying to expose to the person playing your
game? Why is it interesting?

Anyway, this is less of a Recently and more of a ramble.

For this blog, I've also been interested in exploring systems
languages now that I have a year or so of Rust experience under my
belt. I'm curious about the idea of manual memory management and how
it is handled by various different languages, especially with the
recent uptick in C-alternatives, like Zig, Odin, Jai, among
others. I've also been wanting to do a post on "learning systems
languages as a webdev" for awhile now, exploring the Rust ecosystem
as a Ruby on Rails/JavaScript developer. I think I need a stronger
baseline in systems performance before I try to tackle that subject.

Right now I'm reading through _A Tour of C++_ and _Understanding
Software Dynamics_, testing my knowledge of performance programming
and how computers actually work under the hood. It's been a humbling
experience working in manual memory scenarios after so many years of
garbage-collected languages. It's a different landscape when you have
to deal with certain hot-paths in a game loop, for example, where
allocations can lead to undesirable performance characteristics.
