---
title: Best of 2024
date: 2024-12-29
description: |
  A summary of 2024. Things I liked, projects I worked on,
  media I consumed.
---

I'm always surprised when distilling a year into a single post just how many
things take place over those 365 days. When I'm in the thick of it I'm rarely
thinking about the details. Events and projects come and go, rarely do I take a
step back and properly register their impact or my feelings. So forgive me a
moment of catharsis.

## Game development

I made a game! It's a little game, but I'm proud of it. It received second place
in a game jam and I think it's pretty good (only 25-ish entries in the jam so
reign in the enthusiasm). At the very least, it contains my current best attempt
at level design. Play it for free:
[Kat's Ghost](https://mgmarlow.itch.io/kajam2024).

Unsurprisingly the game is a block-pushing puzzle game similar to Sokoban. I say
unsurprisingly because the Sokoban-like has been one of my favorite subgenres of
puzzle games ever since
[Stephen's Sausage Roll](https://store.steampowered.com/app/353540/Stephens_Sausage_Roll/)
(which I haven't even finished because it's devilishly hard). The Sokoban-like
is the platonic ideal of a puzzle game: all logic, simple controls, simple
constraints.

I also got into crossword construction this year, releasing two midi-sized
American-style crosswords. Both of which are Dungeons and Dragons themed:

- [Dragons in Dungeons](https://crosshare.org/crosswords/4cnnnccIGVfe5B42YqkL/dragons-in-dungeons)
- [Adventure Awaits](https://crosshare.org/crosswords/Y5Mj2up2SCMDKqeUTsUx/adventure-awaits)

I tried (and failed) to get the first of those puzzles accepted into
[Puzzmo](https://www.puzzmo.com/today) during their open submission period.
Here's hoping my next submission does better.

2024 was a big year for puzzles. The availability of free online puzzle games
like [Minute Cryptic](https://www.minutecryptic.com/),
[Blockables](https://www.blockables.app/), and the mainstays of Puzzmo or NYT
have made puzzle-solving a daily exercise. We're living in the golden ages of
snackable puzzle games. My morning routine has suffered.

This year also marks the release of
[Braid Anniversary Edition](https://store.steampowered.com/app/499180/Braid_Anniversary_Edition/),
released 16 years after the original. It includes the most in-depth commentary
I've ever seen for a video game, talking game design, programming, art, and
music. It offers a ton of wisdom and has inspired me to create. It's also just a
phenomenal game.

## Start (and end) Emacs

Late 2023 and early 2024 I spent quite a bit of time on
[Crafted Emacs](https://github.com/SystemCrafters/crafted-emacs) with the goal
of helping folks get started with Emacs. I've always felt that most of the
starter kits pack too much extra stuff into the base Emacs installation, making
for a very complicated or cumbersome first experience. Ditto for distributions
like DOOM or Spacemacs that effectively hijack the built-in Emacs configuration
tools in favor of custom ones (e.g. layers). Crafted Emacs felt like a nice,
intermediate step.

That said, there was still something about Crafted Emacs that prevented me from
recommending it to folks that were interested in switching to Emacs. For one,
the README is that particular breed of verbosity that old-school Emacs hackers
are so fond of. Heavy on the philosophy, light on the examples. For two, the
module system is just inherently complicated. I really wanted to push new Emacs
users towards a single-file configuration, just like how I started.

And so I created [Start Emacs](https://github.com/mgmarlow/start-emacs). It's
basically just a "better defaults" setup for Emacs with some packages that align
the Emacs and VSCode experience. I'm particularly happy with the
[extension guide](https://github.com/mgmarlow/start-emacs/blob/main/EXTENDING.md)
guide, which moves a lot of the optional configuration into a handful of
recipes.

During the making of Start Emacs I moved back to Windows as my primary dev
machine and was absolutely hating the experience. Emacs mostly worked, but
mainstays like Magit were horribly slow and many packages assumed access to
standard Linux utilities like `diff` or `grep`. I spent so many hours messing
around with different Windows development kits ([MSYS2](https://www.msys2.org/),
[w64devkit](https://github.com/skeeto/w64devkit), etc.) but couldn't find
something I was happy with. Finally I gave up and
[swapped over to WSL](https://github.com/mgmarlow/start-emacs/blob/main/WINDOWS.md).

This period of Windows hacking had me switching back and forth a few different
text editors while I troubleshooted Emacs, finally motivating me to try out
[Helix](https://helix-editor.com/). The
[vim-ish keybindings](https://github.com/helix-editor/helix/wiki/Migrating-from-Vim)
definitely threw me for a loop, sitting in that awkward area of close enough to
vim that it feels familiar, yet far enough away that I'm constantly invoking the
wrong commands. But after I garnered enough experience with it I grew to like it
so much that I started questioning my motivations. Why am I spending so much
time setting up Emacs when I have a capable editor already working?

I switched and haven't looked back.

I've tried writing a blog post about my new setup but I can't motivate myself
because it's so banal. I use Helix for editing text, tmux to manage terminal
windows (which works excellent in the Windows Terminal, surprisingly), and have
replaced all of my usual Emacs power features with CLI tools like ripgrep or
Awk. I'm probably not as productive since I still lack familiarity with my
tools, but I've really been enjoying leveraging a console workflow instead of
relying on a GUI editor.

Am I done with Emacs? Probably. Do I still think Emacs is a great tool?
Absolutely! Don't let my experience dissuade you from trying it out.

## Ruby on Rails

This year felt like a great one for
[Ruby on Rails](https://rubyonrails.org/2024/12/18/wrap-up-2024-from-rails-foundation).
The release of Rails 8 brings a bunch of awesome improvements, including
built-in authentication, full-stack SQLite, and zero-build frontend development.
Folks are talking about Rails again and they're doing so with a ton of
enthusiasm.

Coincidentally all of this Rails enthusiasm lines up with a job change for
myself, taking on a new role that does a lot more traditional Rails development.
I'm thankful that I have the opportunity to work with Ruby everyday.

That said, I've never worked at a Rails shop that actually used Rails for the
frontend. Every single app that I've worked on professionally with Rails has
been an Rails JSON API paired with a SPA frontend, usually React. With SSR
making a big comeback this year (thanks to Hotwire, HTMX, among others) I'm
eager to dive into the new suite of Rails tools.

## Books

This year continues a reading trend from the past few years: an exploration into
Japanese literature through Haruki Murakami. Since then I've expanded to another
Japanese-borne author, Kazuo Ishiguro, and am dabbling in the works of Yukio
Mishima. But Murakami still reigns as my most-read author for the third year in
a row.

He's especially notable this year thanks to the release of _The City and Its
Uncertain Walls_ in November. Let's just say the Murakami excitement was high.

Here are some of my reading highlights for this year:

- [_The City and Its Uncertain Walls_](https://bookshop.org/p/books/the-city-and-its-uncertain-walls-haruki-murakami/21187339)
  by Haruki Murakami. I just finished this one last week so it's fresh in my
  memory. I was surprised at how much of this book rehashes content from
  _Hard-boiled Wonderland_, with the exploration of consciousness as a town
  surrounded by a wall. Despite that, I enjoyed the deeper exploration into the
  shadow-self. "My real self isn't here. It's somewhere else. The me that's here
  looks like me, but is nothing more than a shadow projected onto the ground and
  walls..." Quite a few aspects of this novel parallel _1Q84_, particularly the
  protagonist who searches for a long-lost love that rules his heart. _The City
  and Its Uncertain Walls_ is an exploration of the self and how it relates to
  the world around us.

- [_Anathem_](https://bookshop.org/p/books/anathem-neal-stephenson/8961850) by
  Neal Stephenson. I've seen the name Neal Stephenson on many a massive tome at
  my local bookstore but haven't read any until this year. Now I'm hooked.
  _Anathem_ is a slow novel in every category, but its exploration of
  philosophical topics is thorough and endlessly interesting for a layperson
  like me. Underpinning the novel is an exploration of realism and nominalism,
  depicted through manufactured names created for the world of _Anathem_. Just
  don't come to _Anathem_ looking for plot.

- [_1Q84_](https://bookshop.org/p/books/1q84-haruki-murakami/6864629) by Haruki
  Murakami. It's long, ponderous, and contains one too many Proust references,
  but aspects of the work feel cohesive in a way that Murakami's other novels
  don't. I'm also a sucker for a story about a writer. I am not prepared for a
  literary analysis of _1Q84_ though, I was mostly sailing on vibes.

- [_Never Let Me Go_](https://bookshop.org/p/books/never-let-me-go-kazuo-ishiguro/228756)
  by Kazuo Ishiguro. I was introduced to Ishiguro from his most latest novel,
  _Klara and the Sun_, which I found to be an enjoyable exploration of empathy,
  if a bit superficial on the Sci-Fi implications of an Android protagonist.
  _Never Let Me Go_ has similar themes but delivers on them more successfully.
  But man, is this book a bummer. Where _Klara and the Sun_ is light and
  forgiving, _Never Let Me Go_ is oppressive and unyielding.

I also wanted to shout-out
[_The Awk Programming Language_](https://bookshop.org/p/books/the-awk-programming-language-brian-kernighan/20334738)
which had a second edition release late last year that I finished in February.
It's unexpectedly one of the best programming books that I've read recently for
a language that I had no prior experience with. I bought the book expecting
perl-ish one-liners for simple problems, but stayed for its profound analysis of
DSLs and Awk as a toolkit for building them. Incredible stuff. These days I have
too much enjoyment searching for problems that I can solve using little Awk
scripts.

## Movies

Over the last couple years I've met with a group of friends every weekend to
discuss a movie that one of us picked. A kind of movie-book-club.

The result has been great. I'm thinking more critically about the media I
consume and my relationship to it. I'm exposed to other perspectives that
reflect experience I would've never gathered myself. I'm thankful to have the
opportunity to meet and talk with others about this kind of stuff.

Notable films that I watched this year:

- [_Perfect Days_](https://letterboxd.com/film/perfect-days-2023/). I would
  describe this film as a personification of Taoism. It follows the daily ritual
  of a janitor for
  [The Tokyo Toilet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tokyo_Toilet), an artsy
  urban development project distilled into fancy toilets. The movie is slow and
  contemplative and well worth the watch.

- [_Vertigo_](https://letterboxd.com/film/vertigo/). Lately I've been on a
  little Hitchcock kick, _Vertigo_ being the first of the bunch that I haven't
  already seen. Unsurprisingly, it's great. It's a bit slow, but the twists are
  worth it.

- [_Evil Does Not Exist_](https://letterboxd.com/film/evil-does-not-exist/).
  2021's _Drive My Car_ is one of my favorite films, period. So I went into
  _Evil Does Not Exist_ with high expectations. Unfortunately this one did not
  do much for me. There's some allegorical storytelling underpinning this movie,
  filling in the lines between some light plot elements and nature
  cinematography. And while that cinematography is gorgeous, I couldn't shake a
  sense of boredom at the many extended pauses between beats. Normally
  contemplative movies are a hit for me, but this movie didn't spark any
  thoughts with its storytelling that were worthy of the thoughtful moments.

- [_Autumn Sonata_](https://letterboxd.com/film/autumn-sonata/). Speaking of
  thoughtful moments. Look, Ingmar Bergman makes excellent movies. _Autumn
  Sonata_ is no exception. There's a scene in this movie that is a slow pan onto
  the face of Liv Ullmann, broadcasting an entire life's worth of emotions into
  a mere thirty seconds.

## Games

I was so starved for puzzles after beating Braid that I followed it up by
playing through all of The Talos Principle and about a forth of the sequel. But
neither of those games came out this year, so here's a short list of a few
others that sparked my interest.

- _[Braid: Anniversary Edition](https://store.steampowered.com/app/499180/Braid_Anniversary_Edition/)_.
  Already mentioned above. Do yourself a favor and pick it up, both for the game
  and the commentary.

- [_The Rookery_](https://store.steampowered.com/app/3074200/The_Rookery/). You
  have to be some kind of Chess sicko to get a kick out of this game, but if you
  are, it will suck up a ton of your time. It's effectively Chess: the
  roguelike, but executed incredibly well. It lacks the presentational details
  of something like _Balatro_ (another great game this year) but still offers a
  tight gameplay loop.

- [_UFO 50_](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1147860/UFO_50/). An incredible
  achievement that is an easy recommendation for anyone remotely interested in
  game design. There are so many ideas in this game (well, at least 50) that
  twist well-known game mechanics in compelling ways. When I first heard about
  this game years ago I thought it was going to be a Warioware-like collection
  of minigames. Imagine my surprise when almost every one of the 50 games is
  about the length of an original NES title. The fact that this game was ever
  finished is an achievement. That it includes so many great games is nothing
  short of amazing.

- [_Animal Well_](https://store.steampowered.com/app/813230/ANIMAL_WELL/). I
  have played many metroidvanias over the years but have finished almost none of
  them. Animal Well is an exception. It wasn't my favorite game to play in 2024
  but it was certainly my favorite one to talk about. There was a general sense
  of excitement around this title that was infectious, helped along by some
  devilish secrets.

## Looking ahead

Not mentioned in this post are a couple months that I spent working on a Chess
engine, or other numerous side projects that have been tabled, resumed, and
tabled again. I'm thinking a lot about my
[reading stack](https://macwright.com/2020/12/24/the-new-reading-stack.html),
for lack of a better term. I've been noodling on a few ideas for building my own
Goodreads alternative that doesn't have any of the AI cruft from Storygraph,
focused purely on reading and notetaking. We'll see where it goes.

I'm also attempting to break into the world of longform writing, in the way of
nonfiction. In other words, I'm writing a book. Well, several. Most of my
attempts have suffered the same fate as the average side project, with myself
working furiously until interest wanes, then promptly abandoning the idea.

Eventually one of my many book ideas will make its way into a finished product,
and when that happens I hope those of you still reading this post will enjoy the
result.
