---
title: New stuff in Emacs 30
date: 2024-07-28
updated: 2025-02-13
description: |
  Reading through the Emacs 30 NEWS file and picking
  out the stuff I think is the most interesting.
tags: emacs
---

Emacs 30.1 is near on the horizon with the most recent pretest (30.0.93) made
[available in late December](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2024-12/msg00869.html).
This post highlights some new features in the upcoming release that I find
especially compelling.

If you want to know _everything_ that's upcoming, check out
[the full release notes](https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs.git/tree/etc/NEWS?h=emacs-30).

## Native compilation enabled by default

This is huge!

[Native compilation](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/elisp/Native-Compilation.html)
was introduced in Emacs 28 behind a configuration flag, so even though it's been
around for a little while you probably aren't using it unless you compile your
Emacs from source (or use a port that explicitly had it enabled). Enabling it by
default brings it to more users.

This feature compiles Emacs Lisp functions to native code, offering 2-5x faster
performance to the byte-compiled counterpart. The downside is an additional
dependency (`libgccjit`) and a little extra compilation overhead when installing
a package for the first time. The downsides are so minor that enabling it by
default is a no-brainer.

## Native (and faster) JSON support

You no longer need an external library (`libjansson`) to work with JSON in
Emacs. On top of that, JSON parsing performance in Emacs is significantly
improved (the author provides that parsing is up to **8x faster**). This is all
thanks to Géza Herman's contribution:
[I created a faster JSON parser](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2024-03/msg00244.html).
He summarizes his changes later in that thread:

> My parser creates Lisp objects during parsing, there is no intermediate step
> as Emacs has with jansson. With jansson, there are a lot of allocations, which
> my parser doesn't have (my parser has only two buffers, which exponentially
> grow. There are no other allocations). But even ignoring performance loss
> because of mallocs (on my dataset, 40% of CPU time goes into malloc/free), I
> think parsing should be faster, so maybe jansson is not a fast parser in the
> first place.

Great stuff.

## use-package version control support

You can now install packages directly from version-controlled repositories (for
those packages that aren't yet in ELPA, Non-GNU ELPA or MELPA).

For example:

```elisp
(use-package bbdb
  :vc (:url "https://git.savannah.nongnu.org/git/bbdb.git"
       :rev :newest))
```

This also means that you can opt into package updates based on commit instead of
latest release (e.g. `:rev :newest`). I think this is actually a sleeper feature
of `:vc`, since the default Emacs package release/update cycle can be a little
wonky at times.

If you want all of your `:vc` packages to prefer the latest commit (instead of
the latest release), you can set `use-package-vc-prefer-newest` to `t`.

## Tree-sitter modes are declared as submodes

I had to read this change a few times before I grokked what it was saying.
Tree-sitter modes, e.g. `js-ts-mode`, are now submodes of their non-tree-sitter
counterpart, e.g. `js-mode`. That means any configuration applied to the
non-tree-sitter mode also applies to the tree-sitter mode.

In other words, my `.dir-locals.el` settings for `js-mode` simply apply to
`js-ts-mode` as well, without needing to write it explicitly. A nice quality of
life change to help pare down Emacs configurations that rely on both modes
(which is more common than you might think, given that non-tree-sitter modes are
typically more featureful).

## Minibuffer QOL improvements

Some nice quality-of-life improvements for the default Emacs completions:

- You can now use the arrow keys to navigate the completion buffer vertically
  (in addition to the `M-<up|down>` keybindings).

- Previous minibuffer completion selections are deselected when you begin typing
  again (to avoid accidentally hitting a previous selection).

- `completions-sort` has a new value: `historical`. Completion candidates will
  be sorted by their order in minibuffer history so that recent candidates
  appear first.

## Customize interface for dir-locals

There's now a customize interface for
[Directory Variables](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Directory-Variables.html):

```txt
M-x customize-dirlocals
```

I always find myself forgetting the `.dir-locals.el` syntax (even though they're
just lists!) so this is a surprisingly handy feature for me.

## New mode: visual-wrap-prefix-mode

Now this one is cool. I'm the kind of guy who uses `auto-mode` for everything
because I haven't bothered to figure out how Emacs line wrapping works.
Everything I write hard breaks into newlines after 80 characters.

The new mode `visual-wrap-prefix-mode` is like `auto-mode`, except that the
breaks are for display purposes only. I think this is incredibly useful when
editing text that might be reviewed using a diffing tool, since long lines tend
to display more useful diffs than a paragraph broken up with hard breaks. I'm
actually pretty excited about this change, maybe it will get me to stop using
`(markdown-mode . (( mode . auto-fill))` everywhere.

## New command: replace-regexp-as-diff

You can now visualize regular expression replacements as diffs before they're
accepted. This is actually incredible.

## New package: which-key

Previously a package in GNU ELPA, `which-key-mode` is now built-in. With
`which-key-mode` enabled, after you begin a new command (e.g. `C-x`) and wait a
few seconds, a minibuffer will pop up with a list of possible keybinding
completions. It's a super handy tool for remembering some of the more esoteric
modes.

## New customizations

- Show the current project (via `project.el`) in your modeline with
  `project-mode-line`.

- Add right-aligned modeline elements via `mode-line-format-right-align`.

- You can now customize the venerable `yes-or-no-p` function with
  `yes-or-no-prompt`.

## A few Emacs Lisp changes

There are a few small, yet impactful changes around help buffers and Emacs Lisp
types that I think are worth noting.

- `describe-function` shows the function inferred type when available:

```txt
C-h f concat RET

(concat &rest SEQUENCES)
  Type: (function (&rest sequence) string)
```

- Built-in types show their related classes:

```txt
C-h o integer RET

integer is a type (of kind ‘built-in-class’).
 Inherits from ‘number’, ‘integer-or-marker’.
 Children ‘fixnum’, ‘bignum’.
```

- The byte compiler warns if a file is missing the lexical binding directive.
  Lexical bindings have been included in ELisp for awhile now, so it's nice to
  see more effort being made towards making it the default.

```elisp
;;; Foo mode  -*- lexical-binding: t -*-
```

## Read the full details

That wraps up my highlights. There's a ton more stuff included in Emacs 30.1 so
I encourage you to
[check it out the NEWS yourself](https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs.git/tree/etc/NEWS?h=emacs-30).

PS. Interested in trying out Emacs but don't know where to start? Check out my
MIT-licensed configuration guide:
[Start Emacs](https://github.com/mgmarlow/start-emacs).
