---
title: My Year in Reading
date: 2023-12-23
---

I keep my reading list in a simple spreadsheet, driven by mutual
dislike of every book-tracking website on the internet. With the
spreadsheet I've learned the value of tracking ISBNs: keep the book
data minimal and simply look it up later with the help of the
OpenLibrary API:
[9780399563126](https://openlibrary.org/books/OL29755442M.json).

I read 24 books this year, totaling about 8,000 pages. I am not a
contemporary reader, so many of the books that I read are not
new. Here are some things I found notable.

## Murakami

I read four different books by Haruki Murakami this year, starting
with _What I Talk About When I Talk About Running_ and following up
with _Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the End of the World_, _Men Without
Women_, and _The Wind-up Bird Chronicle_.

I started because of a friend's recommendation, I was otherwise
unacquainted with his work (although now I notice the growth of his
shelf in my local bookstore, he seems to be gaining quite a bit of
popularity). Knowing nothing other than the name, I began with his
memoir, _What I Talk About When I Talk About Running_. In retrospect
it was a strange choice. Beginning with a memoir feels like attempting
to uncover the mind behind work you haven't yet experienced, a look
backwards at a history unknown as the reader. At least in this case
the memoir was faithful to its title and stuck closest to his passion
of running.

That first book definitely planted a seed that I spent a fair bit of
the year exploring. Overall I find myself enjoying the simple style
and prose of his work, if not so much the plot and characterization. I
think his short stories shine a bit brighter than his full-length
novels, simply because they don't require the same level of character
development and beats to string it along. I'd recommend starting with
any of his short story collections, _Men Without Women_ being a good
choice if you're interested in watching the excellent movie "Drive My
Car" at any point.

## Doom

John Romero released an autobiography this year, _Doom Guy: Life in
First Person_, which despite the title is an engaging glimpse into an
incredibly formative period in video game history. Is it a better
telling of Id's story than _Masters of Doom_? No. But it does add
quite a bit of extra of Romero-specific detail that will be of
interest to other Doom-heads like myself.

This year I went down a pretty deep Doom modding rabbit hole, sparked
by the release of
[MyHouse.wad](https://www.doomworld.com/forum/topic/134292-myhousewad/),
a mind-bending and meticulous creative achievement. Turns out, Doom is
still good. And Romero is still making levels! Check out [Sigil I and
II](https://romero.com/sigil), the second of which came out this very
year.

## The Left Hand of Darkness

Ursula K. Le Guin is quickly becoming one of my favorite Sci-Fi
authors, first with _The Dispossessed_ and now with _The Left Hand of
Darkness_. Having read a few books by her now, I think that _The Left
Hand of Darkness_ is most emblematic of her style, and most clearly
draws forward a vision that is unique to her. This book is really
exceptional, if not for the subject manner than for the incredible
world-building and appeal to the human condition that makes exploring
an alien culture so captivating. I just can't say enough good things
about this book.

## Lisping

Emacs is the gateway drug to parethenses that seems to inevitably lead
to the Common Lisp rabbit hole, a place where programmers are trapped
in the 80s and lots of fantastic literature is available for
free. Learning Common Lisp has been very rewarding for me, at least in
the way that exposes the power of macros and "bottom-up"
programming. And no other text explains these principles better than
Paul Graham's [_On Lisp_](https://paulgraham.com/onlisp.html).

_On Lisp_ is the first text that I've worked through (mostly, at
least) in my Common Lisp backlog. I chose it because my working
knowledge of macros was surface-level; I saw why they were useful and
knew how their work was performed, but could not create a strong case
for their use. _On Lisp_ is widely cited as the "macro explainer" for
Common Lisp, and I generally agree with that view. Paul Graham has a
depth of knowledge in the Common Lisp field that transcends the
language, the nature of bottom-up design is presented as a compelling
tool in its own right, Common Lisp is merely the best way to support
it.

If learning Common Lisp has done anything for me it's left me with the
longing for a powerful REPL in any language that I'm working
with. Nothing is quite at the level of Common Lisp and Emacs, where
evaluating code from the text editor and sending it to the REPL is as
easy as `C-x C-e`. Rails console is about as close as you get
nowadays, but that would never be mistaken for a REPL workflow because
it's mainly for exploration and sandboxed experimentation. Tests are
the modern Ruby workflow and I just don't think they're as powerful,
expressive, and evolutionary as a REPL-based Common Lisp workflow.

Up next, _Paradigms of Artificial Intelligence Programming_ by Peter
Norvig.

